the higher up you are, some people start
to forget who they are. Because once you
get into position of power, people are
always going to tell you, "You're doing
well. Aren't you fantastic?" You have to
have truth-tellers around you, and you
have to be willing to listen. And so, I
think as leaders, it's our job to
understand when is it time to go? When
do we need another leader in this role?
>> Last year, I spoke to Melinda French
Gates, who has faced a lot of change in
her life. And it's not just in her
personal life, her charitable work is
also dedicated to change. French Gates
began her career in tech, often the only
woman in the room. She joined Microsoft
as one of the few female managers in the
company. She rises quickly, meets Bill
Gates, they marry, and she becomes one
of the wealthiest and most influential
women in the world. And then, [music]
she walks away.
In her new book, The Next Day, she
reflects on making that choice to change
everything. I'm Francine Lacqua, and
this is Leaders, the series that
explores what drives the world's most
influential people.
Melinda French Gates, thank you so much
for joining us. Now, you wrote a book,
Next Day, which is inspiring.
Why? And why why did you call it The
Next Day?
>> Well, I turned 60 last year, and so the
book came out right around the time of
my 60th birthday, and in writing it, as
I approached that birthday, I realized I
had been through a lot of transitions in
life by then. And I thought, you know,
I've got something I'd like to say about
this, because
we learn a lot through transitions. If
we pause, and if we give ourselves time
to learn, we can actually grow
tremendously during those transitions,
whether they're easy or whether they're
hard.
>> But The Next Day is almost harder, which
is what you explain, because you make a
decision to do something. It's either
leave a job, leave someone, reinvent
yourself, but then it's it's after you
do that that you have to look in the
mirror and that's it. That's the next
day.
>> Yeah. Like and say, "Okay, now what?" I
even tell college graduates, university
graduates these days, "Okay, you think
the transition is when you go through
graduation? No, it's when you wake up
the next day and you're saying, am I
really on the way to where I want to
go?" Right?
>> When do you have to think about that?
The transition? When you make the
decision to to leave something?
>> I think when you make the decision, but
I think sometimes so hard to get through
the transition that's to come. Let's say
you're leaving a job or in my case I was
leaving a marriage or or even okay, I
was pregnant and having my first child.
Wasn't till after she was born that the
next day I could say, "Oh my gosh, this
is what I'm into." So, I don't think
it's till you kind of get to the next
day that you can really at least for me
start to process the transition and
where you are.
>> And and this is really the heart of what
leadership is also like.
>> Mhm.
>> So, what does leadership mean to you?
>> Leadership means, you know, are you
getting the people that are following
you on the path that you think is right?
Are we on the same page about where
we're trying to go with either their
business or life or society?
>> What's the right way actually to be a
leader?
>> Well, I don't think there's one right
way to be a leader. Let me make that
clear. I think there are many ways to be
a good leader. But, I will tell you for
me it means living my values. And having
integrity everywhere I go so that what
I'm saying is also then how I'm living
my life. And I think if we can show up
as a values-based leader,
it's easier for people to follow us over
the long term.
I think sometimes we have leaders in
business, I've seen many of them, or in
society, where they want you to charge
the hill and then as soon as you're done
charging that hill, it's charge the next
hill and then by the time you get to the
third hill or the third mountain and
you're pushing that rock up the hill, it
feels like, "No, wait a minute. Can I do
this again? Do I want to do this again?"
So, to me leadership is if you can be
very values-based going in, I think you
can get people to follow you for a long
period of time, I hope.
>> It feels like it's hard at the moment
because of things, you know, changing so
quickly because of disruption.
When did you decide that that was going
to be what you stood for?
>> So, I worked at Microsoft for 9 years.
Um I came right out of computer science
and business school
and I started working at the company.
There weren't very many women at the
time and it was a rough and tumble world
and I think tech is still pretty tough.
And it was the boys' debate society and
I thought, "Okay, I can rise up. I can
play this game." And I did play the game
and I did quite well. I was moving up
the ranks in the company, but then about
2 years in, so I would have been about
25 at the time, I realized I didn't like
myself. I didn't like how I was treating
people outside of work cuz I was
treating them the same way I was
treating people inside of work, which
was the game we had to play.
And I thought, "No, no, no, this this
isn't right for me." And so, I actually
thought I would leave.
But instead, I thought, "Okay, before I
leave, I will try on inside this company
being who I truly am." And to my
surprise, I did not I thought I would
fall flat on my face. To my surprise, I
actually rose in the company and people
came to work under me in my division
who wanted to have that that type of
leadership and I thought, "Oh,
this can work. There's no reason for me
to be somebody else. Be myself."
>> And you have said that you're you don't
mind conflict.
>> I don't. I don't mind conflict.
>> That's almost a superpower if you use it
for the right things.
>> That's right. And I also believe that in
conflict, you can also still be
yourself. I say to people, being clear
is kind, because I'm giving them
feedback so they can actually grow and
become better, right? So, I don't
actually mind conflict, but I also think
it's the way you do it. It's the tone
you take, it's the precedents you set. I
learned to do it in a way for me that
maintained my integrity and hopefully,
even though the feedback might be hard,
kind to the other person.
>> So, how? Do you have to be gracious?
>> Gracious, thoughtful before you go into
it. One of my mantras that I started to
live by and I told directly my employees
then and now, if I am unhappy with work
you have done, you will hear from me
within 48 hours. I'm not going to tell
you right away cuz I need time to think
it through, if I'm angry about
something, to calm down, that's on me,
but I also am telling you you're not
going to get to your performance review
and have a surprise. So, if they pass
the 48-hour mark, they can be confident
that the job they did was a good job.
>> When I was speaking to Melinda French
Gates, we kept circling back to one
idea, how much being a woman shaped her
leadership journey. She talked about
little moments from childhood that
defined her voice and the very real
internal biases she's had to confront,
not just in boardrooms, but around her
own kitchen table.
Listening to her, it struck me that for
her story, it seemed there was no
separating the two.
>> You have three children.
>> I do.
>> Two daughters, one son.
>> Yes.
>> Did you raise them differently?
>> I tried not to.
Um, so I have a daughter, a son, and a
daughter.
And I had to look at my own bias. I say
that because I tried really hard to
raise them the same, but I'll give you
an example where I had to look at my own
bias. After dinner, I had a rule in the
house that nobody leaves the kitchen
till mom leaves the kitchen, which meant
I wasn't doing the last minute duties.
We were all doing dishes together and
cleaning up and putting the food away.
But I realized
that the tasks I was asking my son to do
were different than the tasks I was
asking my daughters to do. And I had to
look at that and say, why do I think he
should be the one to put out the
garbage? The girls could put out the
garbage. Why do I think they should be
the ones to put the dishes in the
dishwasher? He can do that. So I had to
look at all those roles and say, let
them decide who's going to do what,
right? I say that because I think we all
have bias inside of us. When I was at
the foundation and I would sit at the
head of the table with, you know, a
co-chair sitting next to me, my former
husband,
you know, we would have a group of men
and women often about two dozen or 30
sitting around the table.
And I had to even look at myself and
say, am I helping make sure that both
the men and the women speak equally? If
I see a man talk on top of a woman, I
can say, just a minute, she was about to
make a point. Or, oh, she made a point,
you don't need to repeat it, right? Or
if a woman did it to another woman, I
needed to say, hey, not okay, right?
Were you always like this? No. Oh my
gosh, no. Though these are all lessons
of a lifetime.
Right?
>> But growing up you had a you had a a
great dad, right? That tried to also
show you women in the space world that
that was quite difficult because there
weren't that many cuz you worked for the
Apollo missions.
>> That's right. He was an aerospace
engineer.
And both of my parents believed that all
four of their children should be
educated all the way through university
and educated equally. And my father knew
to go the extra mile, which is amazing
with his two daughters. I'm the second
of two daughters.
He pointed out to us that as an
aerospace engineer, you know, we'd go
watch those
Apollo missions. We'd watch the rocket
leave the launch pad. But he always said
to us, look,
my teams are better when I have female
leaders on them. When I can find female
mathematicians and pull them on the
team.
>> What what did you learn from your
parents on leadership that then you
brought to Microsoft and then the
foundation?
>> I learned from my parents that you
should use your voice. So, we grew up
Catholic, but even when my parents
had things they didn't believe that the
Catholic Church was saying to the
congregation, my parents were okay
pushing back and even would write a
petition to the priests in our parish
saying, "We don't believe in that." And
so, I learned that one person's voice
gathering with others, they got 300
signatures, could push back on an
institution. So, I had those leadership
skills honestly, even going which was
amazing for me, even going into computer
science in college because
even in college there were very few
women and I started realizing I could
lead teams of young men to program and
get projects done.
>> The corporate world seems to have
changed, at least in most industries.
>> Mhm.
>> Do you think your your leadership would
have been different if you had started
working a decade or two decades
afterwards?
>> Well, tell me how you think the
corporate leadership has changed in the
last two decades. Are you saying it's
changed for the positive or the
negative?
>> so, changed for the positive.
>> Mhm.
>> We There There's been a consciousness
about putting more women in leadership
roles.
>> Mhm.
>> And that means more emotional
intelligence than maybe in the early
2000s.
>> Yes, I agree with that.
>> I don't know whether we're regressing
now.
>> Yes, that's why I'm asking you the
question. You know, I can't play exactly
the script of if had I started a decade
later or two decades later, but I think
it would have been easier on me.
And I Look, I question myself. I had a
lot of doubt. I think women in general
tend to carry a little bit more doubt
because of what society has told us for
so long.
I see it less for instance now in my
23-year-old daughter than I do even a
little bit in my older daughter, but
what I do know is that I want for the
next
four generations that come behind me, I
want fewer barriers for women. I want
the workforce to be easier for them. I
want them to know that they can find
allies in the workforce. I want them to
know that they have the same
opportunities men do when they come out
of university and there are natural
networks to step into. I think some of
the barriers have come down, but I don't
think all of them have come down and I
think it's our job as female leaders and
other male leaders to make sure we
continue to lower those barriers.
>> How do you think about the men?
>> I think of them as allies. They need to
be allies in this, right? I know so many
men that say, "Gosh, I educated my son
and my daughter equally. They get out in
the workforce and now I see it. Now I
see what my daughter is up against, my
adult daughter versus my son." And so I
think it takes because many corporations
are run by men, it takes them to say,
"We're going to create a different
culture here. We are going to make sure
that not just the males, but the females
in our company lead."
>> When you speak to chief executives,
world leaders, I know we think a a lot
about people just staying too long.
Staying too long in in either positions
of power or in places where you know,
that they should have moved on.
>> Mhm.
>> How do you think about that?
>> I think sometimes people stay too long
because their egos attached to the job
or because they're too afraid to make
the transition and they may not even
realize they are afraid, but it does
take courage to make a transition. And
so I try to say to them, "Look, there's
something beautiful on the other side,
but when you make the transition, you're
also making way, making room for what
might come next for both you and
whomever's to come behind you, right?
And so I think as leaders, it's our job
to understand when is it time to go?
When do we need another leader in this
role?
>> How would you advise they
you know, is it up to the people that
surrounds them
>> 100%
>> to say like, "Look, hold on.
Think about what you're doing." Or is
there something that they need to think
about from day one?
>> I think it's both. I think they need to
lay out for day one, what are they
trying to accomplish? What happens if
they don't get there? How will What is
their exit ramp for themselves? You
know, do they have a time limit? Like,
if I get X done by year five or but if I
don't, will I leave? So having a plan
going in and then they have to surround
themselves with people who are
truth-tellers and who they will truly
listen to, right? Because once you get
into position of power, people are
always going to tell you, "You're doing
well. You're You're doing great at this.
Aren't you fantastic?" You have to have
truth-tellers around you and you have to
be willing to listen.
>> I feel like that's the hardest thing.
It's making sure that you're not in an
ivory tower where people say you're
wonderful and actually you're doing
things that are wrong.
>> Absolutely. I worry about that for
myself. I worried about that at the
foundation. Like, who's not telling me
the truth? And I knew there were a lot
of people who weren't, but you know
what? I could find the two or three that
would tell me the truth about my
leadership or something they didn't
think was right about the organization.
And so I had to make that safe for them.
I also, outside of that, have
I'm very close to my family and so my
two younger brothers, my older sister,
they will tell me the truth. And they
never, ever let me think that I'm all
that, you know? Especially my brothers.
>> I couldn't sit down with Melinda French
Gates without asking about the challenge
of navigating her identity when it's
easy for people to define her by her
billionaire status and famous
ex-husband. But she was quick to
acknowledge her privilege and explain
that privilege isn't the thing that
makes you special. Being special is
something you have to work for.
>> You faced criticism because you're a
billionaire.
>> Yes.
>> How do you How do you push back and
saying actually I have values and I I
care about everyone despite my great
wealth?
>> Well, I think first I say I make sure I
acknowledge I have privilege. There is
no doubt I have privilege. But I'm a
human being and part of me even writing
this book was for people hopefully who
choose to pick it up and read it or
listen to this podcast feel like, "Oh, I
understand a little bit better where
she's coming from. She came from a
middle-class family. She's trying to
live those values out in the world. So
yes, she may be surrounded in great
wealth,
but maybe she's not like some of the
other big billionaires I see in the news
cuz we're not all the same. Just like
not all people who make a hundred
thousand dollars salary are all the
same. Not even close."
>> And And you chose actually from a quite
early age on how to use your wealth, but
also how to educate your children.
>> Absolutely. I I had this phrase in the
house, "Just because I can or just
because we can doesn't mean we should."
And so I had for my kids each of them
had an allowance. It went up as they got
older to help them manage money, but
there were many things they wanted to
buy. My oldest daughter in particular, I
remember there was a purse she saw in a
store window she had to have when we
went by. She said, "But you can buy it
for me." Of course I could buy it for
her, but I said, "But if I did, what
would that be saying to the other girls
in your middle school? Wouldn't it
separate you?"
>> But was that also a reaction to people
that you saw use money in a, you know,
wasteful way?
>> It wasn't because I saw people wasting
money. It's because I went through
universities with some
other peers who had come from great
wealth. They threw their privilege
around as if they were special.
Just because they came from wealth. And
what I knew was they weren't that
special, right? And so I didn't want my
three children to grow up thinking they
were special because they had a father
with a certain name or we had wealth.
They would become special if they lived
out who they were and they figured out
who they were and what values they had
and what career they wanted to have. My
oldest daughter for instance is in her
medical residency program. I think she's
going to become a pediatrician.
I think she will be an incredibly
special doctor because of her
academic work, but because of how she
cares for her patients in that clinic.
That is what will make her special.
>> Melinda, do you worry I mean when you
were going through the divorce, did you
worry about the children or did you
worry that it was right decision?
>> I worried about both, um for sure, but I
really worried about is this the right
decision and once I knew it was the
right decision for me, I knew I just had
to do it. I I just I couldn't stay. If I
couldn't live my values out in my home
and in my marriage, how could I role
model for my children or live my values
out in society?
>> Was it ever difficult to be the wife of?
Did you have to work doubly hard to be
Melinda French Gates?
>> Of course it was hard. Yes, of course. I
mean first of all,
I didn't even take on the last name at
first when I first got married. Just the
thought of having this big name that was
quite well known, that was odd to me.
But then as I talk about in the book too
as we went on to do our foundation work
and we had the foundation with both our
names on it
on purpose because I believed in
equality.
But you know, even as I would go in to
meet with prime ministers, I remember a
a particular meeting here with the one
of the prime ministers who will go
unnamed. It was a he
in the UK. You know, the two of us
walked into the room and the first
person that prime minister addressed
after he'd met both of us was Bill with
his question. But, I had to learn to
speak up early and often in the
conversation for them to realize, "Oh,
she really knows what she's talking
about, too, when she comes in to speak
to me about these global foundation
issues."
>> Is that leaning in?
>> Uh that's Sheryl Sandberg's words. I
guess I call it I tell my kids it's
leaning forward in a conversation. So, I
learned that just as I was feeling a
little bit diminished in the
conversation or maybe even the person
wanted me to feel diminished, right? I
learned as soon as I had that feeling,
instead of leaning back, I said to my
kids, I learned to lean forward into
that space and I call it leaning forward
into that uncomfortable space. And then
you use your voice or you say what's
right for you.
>> Are you a a trusting person?
>> Absolutely. I'm I sometimes over trust
people, but I definitely trust people.
And I'd rather
walk through life trusting people than
not trusting people.
>> Because?
>> Because you can be yourself. You can be
more open. You can be more real. I've
known a few people in life who just were
more closed. And especially if you're in
a position of privilege,
if you don't trust people and don't know
who you can turn to, boy, can you become
very insular and your world becomes very
small.
>> But it it's also quite rare to find a
leader that can take criticism.
>> Very.
>> Right? And I don't know whether we're
going in in possibly the wrong direction
because of, you know, technology,
because your ideas
are more siloed, actually. You kind of
go down the path of of that being
reinforced instead of open dialogue.
>> I am quite concerned about that as well.
I think with the advent of social media,
while maybe we thought it was going to
do certain positive things, I think the
downstream consequences have been far
worse than we imagined. So, having these
echo chambers or these polarized worlds
where we don't walk in spaces where we
have open dialogue and you just hear
what you want to hear or you hear just
super negative things. We have to do
better than that.
>> Is that what you worry about the most?
Actually, divisions within countries,
within the US, and then at a global
level.
>> Yes. I believe we are far better off
when we see the humanity in one another.
I don't care if you live in Malawi or
Britain or the United States or India.
We are more alike as human beings than
we are different. And yet, I think
social media and the polarization that
has happened has made us feel more
different, but I think we're better off
moving society forward when we are more
centered and when we can hear one
another's points of view. And I'm
telling you, when we're shouting at one
another and throwing invectives around,
we're not hearing one another.
>> How do we get back to that space where
actually you can have a disagreement,
but a polite disagreement?
>> I think it starts in community. It
starts at the grassroots levels. We have
to have places where people feel they
can have an open dialogue, smaller town
halls, smaller group meetings. And once
you start to build that trust, then I
think you can start to maybe accept
somebody has a different point of view
than you do.
>> Belinda, thank you so much. I have three
rapid-fire questions for you.
>> Great.
>> Is that exciting?
>> Oh, yeah.
>> So, here they are.
>> Okay.
>> What do people not know about you?
>> Oh, probably that I have an absolute
addiction to chocolate. It's very hard
for me to go for a day without
chocolate.
>> I love that. What's the signature way
you motivate people?
>> I try to be positive. And I try to bring
out an um
positive attribute that they have inside
of them and hold that up for them so
they can see it, too.
>> What's the craziest interview question
you've ever been asked?
>> People used to, when I was married, ask
me questions about Bill. And I'm like,
I'm not going to answer that. Let him
answer that.
>> [laughter]
>> Melinda French Gates, thank you so much
for joining us.
>> Thanks for having me, Francine.
>> Got it. All right. Bye. Thanks,
everybody.
>> [music]